What were, as the wife of the land commissioner,
what were your social responsibilities in
Austin? Well, all the state official ladies had to
belong to state official ladies club, so I was a
member of that. And even after I came here, Earl
insisted I keep my membership. I did for a ton of
years. So I went to that. Who were your favorite
state official ladies during those years? Well,
Rue Walker's wife, he was on the court, Supreme
Court, Virginia. I don't know, Mary Alice
Shivers. You know, she just died a couple years
ago. And she and I had a good mutual friend. And as
soon as I heard that she had died, I called Anna Mae
Morrison. Now, her husband was not a state
official, But Shivers went into business with
Anna Mae's husband after he left the governor's
office. Anyway, I called her, and she said that she
had talked to her just a couple of days before she
died. And she said, Anna Mae, I don't want anybody
standing up looking at me in the casket. Said, if
you have to, just sit on that lid to keep it from
opening. OK, that's all. All right, so. Oh, Weldon
Hart was Shiver's right-hand man, and his wife was
a good friend. I don't know. All right, you all are
there. The kids are in school. In four different
schools part of the time. And you've got a
comfortable house. Yeah. How was it, who was it
that communicated with Mr. Rutter about possibly
coming over to College Station? whoever was
chairman of the board, but I don't think it was Pat
Zachary, but Pat Zachary talked to me about it.
Like I said, Earl was real undecided if he wanted to
do it because he was afraid he'd be resented.
Because he just had a lowly bachelor degree. He'd
done little work on a master's, but not a whole lot.
While we were at Tarleton, we'd drive up to Fort
Worth and do it through TCU. But Pat Zachary did, he
Talk to me, I'll never forget it. He was the kindest
person. And he wanted me to kinda influence Earl on
coming here. Were there others that you know of
that worked hard to persuade him? Who, Earl? Yes,
ma'am. I don't know. But I know this, when we first
came over here on the campus, and I was seeing the
house we were to live in, I thought, good heavens, I
don't have enough furniture to furnish that big
old house. And you know what happened to it. We'd
been in it five years. We'll get to that in a minute.
All right, so you all moved over here when? We moved
over here the 20... I think it was around the 26th of
January of 1958, the start of the second semester.
That's what I had thought. And you moved into that
big house. Was there some furniture already
there? Oh, yeah. The university had furnished
almost all of the downstairs. Now, we had to buy
breakfast room furniture, but All the downstairs
furniture was university, and a lot of it is in use
still in the President's House on campus. Right.
Did you keep all of your furniture from the Austin
house? Or did you get rid of some? Oh, yeah, but it
didn't amount to a whole lot. Okay. It was
upstairs, so it got burned. And this house was west
of Sabeasa. You know, I've never been in those
directions, but it was first lived in by Lawrence
Sullivan Ross. That was a point to remember.
Right. 1892, I think, it was built. How did you feel
that you were received by the local community?
They were always nice, but I was, oh, heavens, I was
afraid. Like I said, nobody told me what I was
supposed to do. And you didn't know, you didn't
have any... I didn't have any background for it.
And you didn't have any friend here in advance, did
you? You didn't know any of the wives or... Now, the
Davises had had us over for a military weekend
while Earl was still in the land office. I'll never
forget that. I met Lupo. We got out there, and
actually, we had left Brady, and they wanted me to
bring Bud with me. What's your time doing? I'm
doing fine. Bring Bud because the Davises had
Steadman. Did you know he had died several years
ago? No. And see, Bud is now 58, and Stedman was
probably the same age. And he died. I don't know
what reason or anything. Don't know what about Joe
or... I kind of think Marie's not living, but
anyway. We came down, and it was just this balmy
weather. Flowers were blooming in Austin. We
picked Earl up in Austin. And... You know, see,
what happened to Earl? He didn't have time to look
for a place, and he was staying in the Commodore
Perry Hotel. I don't know whether it's even there
now or not. But Jake Pickle heard that Earl was
staying there. And see, Jake's first wife had
died. And they had just the one little girl, Peggy.
And so his wife's parents took Peggy. And so Jake
could still work. And anyway...
he when he heard that Earl was staying at the hotel
and he was out there in the house by himself so he
just go down and said Earl this is silly he said just
pack your stuff and come on out and stay at my house
with me so Earl did and he stayed there from January
till we got moved in August anyway
what was your first reaction to College Station
Amazement, I guess. I don't know. I was still
trying to find out what I was supposed to do.
But, you know, it goes on years and years.
Who was it left? Gordon Eaton, was that a name? He
went to University of Iowa, maybe? Iowa State.
Iowa State, yeah. And she came to me. She said,
somebody told me that I should talk to you about...
what I should do is being a university president. I
said, the only thing I can tell you is just be
yourself. That's all I could, I didn't have any
magic words at all. As far as you know, when you all
came here, was Mr. Rutter given any directions by
the board or anybody as to what he was to do? He was to
be in charge of this campus. Was he supposed to
straighten anything out or clean anything up? You
know, I don't really remember that. I don't know. I
really don't know. But I know that Earl, from the
time we got here, he would always call Mr. Heaton to
find out what the enrollment was as soon as they
registered. And he was keeping his eye on that
enrollment because it wasn't going anywhere.
That's right. It was just stagnant. And so He knew
that some changes had to be made. I don't know how
Earl knew these things. I tell you what, I finally
decided years and years later that I felt like he
went through so much in World War II. And if he could
live through that, he could do about anything.
Sure. But the changes that were made, the most
controversial, of course, was letting the girls
in. And, of course, he had help on that board and
everything. As of late, it looked like somebody
else made all those decisions, you know, but
anyway, he was pretty involved. And when he got up
and announced to the student body, all male, all
military, that the girls would be coming, they
booed him. And that was the most controversial.
The next most controversial was allowing the
Corps to be optional. But there were old Aggies
that didn't speak to him again after that. Oh, you
know one in Beaumont. Yes, that's Charlie
Babcock.
As you all got started here, How did the children
react? Well, it's funny. I was most concerned
about Ann. See, Bud was already in A&M, but Ann had
the nicest bunch of friends in Austin that you'd
ever want your daughter to have, and I was worried
about how she'd feel. Well, at the end of that first
year, I told Earl, much to his amazement, that when
he went to summer camp, I was going to take the kids
and go over, and we still hadn't sold our house in
Austin. I was going to take the kids over there and
we were going to stay there and we had a wonderful
time didn't have any furniture we took sleeping
bags and Jane had a slumber party for her birthday
because it was always when Earl was gone they just
had a great time and Earl said you can't stay in the
house that had any furniture I said that's all
right we'll just take sleeping bags and we drove
into Austin and Ann's remark was I wouldn't move
back here for a million dollars she had just fit
right in from the time we came here because in my
interview with her i got that impression did you
interview her yes ma'am about two weeks ago yeah
and let's see now one of the questions i asked her
i'd like to compare your answer i said and based on
your recollections what big worries
frustrations problems do you remember your dad
talking about he didn't talk at the house from the
office and she said he never broke no he didn't and
that's why i was just so dumb i didn't i didn't know
what was going on somebody tell me something i'd
tell earl he said i knew that long ago Now, I assumed
that part of that came from his military
experience. Could have been. That maybe you don't
take the battle plans and discuss them. He just
never brought any university business home. Now,
when y'all first got here, where was his office
located? In the Koch Building. All right, so even
from the first, in the Koch Building. Yeah. All
right. Now, his title at first was executive vice
president? Just vice president, I think. Okay.
And then he became president. But he was in charge
of this campus. Yes, ma'am. And then the next year,
in 59, he was named president. And, of course, in
65... He was named head of the system. Both. I
remember that. President of the university and of
the system. In those earliest years, on whom do you
think he most relied? Who were his? I'm finding
out. Wayne Hall and Dorsey McCrory. See, Dorsey
was his first assistant. Right. Now, where did he
first know Dorsey? I don't know. He never told me
that. I don't know whether they knew each other. I
kind of think there was Army Reserve connections.
Well, he had a military career, of course, Dorsey
did. But I don't know that they knew each other. I
just don't know. And, of course, Dorothy, Dorothy
McCrory's dad was Dorsey's general. Oh, I didn't
know that. She was the general's daughter. What
parts of the task do you think Mr. Rudder most
enjoyed? and least enjoyed of being president? I
hate to say what he would have enjoyed. I don't
know. He just enjoyed always working with young
people, young men particularly. And I don't know
what he least enjoyed. I don't know. He never told
me. He never said, I don't enjoy this. Like, I don't
think he enjoyed making speeches. Oh, no, he
didn't. You're right there. he didn't on the other
hand I have the impression that he did enjoy going
to Austin and Washington into the real world of
politics because he knew so many people you know
when Ed Cooper became his assistant and I guess
that he followed Dorsey and I don't remember what
Dorsey did after he was a development director
that's right But I had seen a picture of Ed in the
battalion, I guess, and said he was going to be
Earl's new assistant. Earl didn't tell me that he
was having him over at his luncheon before the ball
game. Of course, those luncheons were so small,
they were in the assembly room, and it would only
hold a certain number. Anyway, I looked across,
and there was Ed Cooper. I knew it was him because
I'd seen his picture in the paper. happened to have
caught my eye at the same time. Well, here he came
and he said, is there anything I can do for you, Miss
Rutter? I said, nobody ever asked me that before. I
was looking after Earl. I said, I accused the
battalion of photographers the same thing.
They'd get Earl looking just real pretty and I'd
look like the Dickinson. They'd snap the picture.
Let's see, Hall and McCrory. On the board, who were
the people that you remember that mr rudder worked
with most closely i don't know what i think that
most closely or not but we both knew and thought the
world of pat zachary and you know earl could call on
him if somebody that was supposed to have made a
commencement address had to cancel out at the last
minute well you could ask pat zachary he could say
more in fewer words than anybody i ever knew and He
was just the nicest person. Of course, Sterling
Evans was a good friend. Earl could not have asked
for a better board to work with. I've always, in my
remarks about those times of change, I've said how
blessed we were at that point. Oh, absolutely.
These were people who had made big decisions, and
they were not out to try to... make their egos
bigger. No. They did it for the good of A&M. That's
right. That's right. Boyle. Who? Mr. Boyle from
Dow Chemical. Dr. Boyle, yeah. He was a fine
person. Al Davies. Al's not good right now. Oh,
really? No. Mildred called me. And Dick Goodson
from Southwestern Bell. All of those people were
good and positive. Oh, absolutely good. All
right.
non-compulsory core and co-education and name
change and so forth, I was on the aspirations
committee and it was my job to write the draft of
that report. Was that the blueprint for progress
or not? No, that one comes later. Okay. And I turned
it in to Vice President Hall. He called me three or
four days later and gave me a copy which Mr. Rutter
had read, a rough draft, and he had many comments
and so forth. Earl, did he? Yes, ma'am. Make his
case. Yes, ma'am. Some of which were disagreement
with our, and Dr. Hall had said, here, take it,
redraft it. I go back to him and I said, sir, I can't
in good faith make some of these changes because
our committee, these are our recommendations. We
may be in error. But we do believe that if we don't
have co-education, if we don't make the Corps
volunteer, that we're not going to grow. And the
fourth change was admitting the minorities.
Right. And that was done very smoothly. Right. And
he said, I'll stake my job. Who, Earl said that? No,
Hall. See, I hadn't talked to Mr. Rutter at all. He
said, I'll stake my job on your... opportunity to
say what the committee believes. Now, I can't
guarantee you what's going to be the result, but
do. And as I have heard through the grapevine that
Fred Benson and Hall both spoke up and that Mr.
Rutter listened to them. But let's try to name the
others who deserve credit. we had at that point we
had Bill Moore supportive we had Sterling Evans on
the board we had Buck Wirus with the association
John Lindsay was the chairman or the president of
the association that year and they endorsed it so
we had a number are there some other people that you
can think of that deserve credit I don't think so
Now, as I have heard, this is hearsay, on racial
integration, the way Mr. Rutter really made it
come about, that he called Washington and told the
Defense Department when they sent this year's
group of enlisted men at Army expense to come down
here and finish their degree, that include in this
year's group some minority students. I never
heard that. Well, as I understood it, and that then
I understood that he called Mr. Heaton in and said,
okay, Lloyd, you review all of their transcripts.
They've assured me that they won't send anybody
whose grades are in doubt and who's in trouble or
anything. You check them out, be sure they're all,
and then you call every instructor every teacher
who's going to have one of these in class and tell
them that these students have been admitted,
everything is in order, and I had heard myself Mr.
Heaton say a year or two earlier, over my dead body
will we ever have black students here. You know,
all I can remember Earl saying, I think I remember
him saying this, that instead of having them out in
the line to register, which he had them come inside
and registered them, they weren't ever out in the
line, and then they just appeared in their
classes. And I don't remember a single mumble. I
don't either. A single anything. And there again.
Pretty smooth. And it worked well, and it began in
the summer. So that then when the fall semester
began, nobody could say it wouldn't work. It had
worked smoothly as could be. Do you remember any
individuals coming up to either of you to complain
or to cheer about any of these changes? I remember.
You mentioned Charlie Babcock. We ran into him in
an airport one time, and he just turned his head.
Really? He didn't speak. But as far as minorities,
I don't know of anything, really. I never heard
any. The only thing was when Dick Bernard was
Earl's assistant. That was down the line
sometimes. I remember him. There was a group of
them, black students, that came in Earl was in the
hospital with his blood pressure and Dick wanted
he came from the office over to me said he just
needed to go down tell her what had happened I said
oh Dick I said he's down there with high blood
pressure let's don't let's don't bother him but he
went anyway well Earl couldn't get out of there
fast enough they were going to come back the next
day and did But Earl just talked to them, said, is
there anything that's keeping you from getting
your education here? They couldn't think of a
thing that was keeping them from it. So he said,
well, just go back and hit your books. What were
they complaining about? Don't know. But they were
marching on the office. And they whipped out these
ID cards so fast that Dick didn't know what was
going on. I don't know what's become of him. I
haven't heard of him in a long time. He got his PhD at
University of Houston, I understand. Right. I
interviewed Ed Cooper not long ago, up at his place
at the lake, and he's enjoying life. Oh yeah. Now
let's see, and he told me that, maybe I mentioned
this to you a while ago, he told me that he thought
LBJ was also a positive factor in encouraging
co-education and non-compulsory core. I didn't
know he had an opinion even. He could have had, but I
don't know. He said he thought that on one of the
occasions when Mr. Rutter went to Washington to
try to find some more federal money, that he said,
because I realized after he came back from that
trip, he was more positive about, let's go ahead
and do it. Yeah. And he said... Could have been. I
don't know. And I think I can imagine Lyndon
Johnson putting his arm around somebody's
shoulder and giving them... He was pretty good at
encouraging. That's what I've heard. That's what
I've heard. Yeah. Let's see. Do you remember any
anecdotes of Rutter and Teague or Rutter and Lupo,
those classmates? Of course, Earl and... And
Tiger were close buddies. That's what I
understood. Oh, yeah, definitely. He got a little
disturbed about Lupo. Oh, really? Oh, you know, he
had a hand in when they stole the mascots and all
that kind of thing. Oh, that's right. Oh, he liked
him. But, you know, I have a picture taken at the
time Earl was inaugurated of all the ones of his
class that were here for the inauguration. And I
honestly don't know how many are left now. This
Arthur Sherlock is still living. At least I
haven't heard he died. But most of them are gone.
And I told Bubba Lupo, Lupo's son, that I had a
picture if he wanted to get a copy of it. Now, let's
see, Class of 32. Maggie McGee was Class 31. Maggie
was a good friend. Oh, yes, yes. And you know, a lot
of people didn't understand when they named the
administration building for Connolly. Well, he
did more for higher education when he was governor
than almost anybody.
Maggie provided the plane, and they had all
different heads of different schools would fly
all over the place for stuff. I don't know. I didn't
understand it. Earl didn't explain it to me. That
spring of 62, when John Connolly was running for
the Democratic nomination, again, Republican
nomination didn't matter then, I went out to
Easterwood Airport, and he landed in a DC-3 that
somebody had loaned him that had an orange rudder.
and he began his remarks by apologizing for
landing on that airport with anything painted
orange but he said this was loaned to me for free and
if you know any Aggie that will loan me a maroon
plane for free I'll use it he was a good governor did
y'all visit while they were governor did y'all
visit with the Connolly's son I don't remember we
were close to the shivers Okay. But I don't know
that... So you were... But we knew the Connellys.
Yes. And any time that he was down here, you know, I
was...
Now, of your president wife days, what did you
enjoy most? What events? What activities? Oh, I
don't know. I enjoyed it, you know.
I'll tell you, after moving over in the current
president's house, I enjoyed the flowers. You
know, they had those raised beds, and I did flower
arrangements to my heart content. I love to do
that. Let's jump back to the fire. Okay. That is
the... 26th of January, 63. That's what I thought.
During the old exam period, and... It was between
semesters. That's what I mean, yeah. And... It
happens during, begins during the daytime,
doesn't it? At noon. And I called. Earl was still
over at the office, and he was to have lunch with the
board of the former students. And I called over
there, and I said, now, Earl, don't get excited,
but the house is on fire. I didn't want him to have a
heart attack or something, but... Actually, what
happened, we had this black man named George
Washington. Of course, the kids made up a story
about him and said, you'd call over there, and this
man's voice would answer. He'd say, President's
House, George Washington speaking. Well, that
was not so. George would run when the phone rang.
His favorite thing to do was going outside and
sweeping the walk so he could watch the students
walk by. He did that endlessly. But that day, it was
Saturday, it burned.
It was a cold, cold and windy day. And they had
painted the house in the fall. We were just so lucky
that it didn't happen at night because most of the
windows upstairs were stuck. And we always felt
like we were very lucky in that department. But
George wanted to go to the bank, which was open
until noon on Saturday. And so he called up. to me
and wanted to go. And I said, OK. Well, unbeknownst
to me, he just loaded the fireplace with firewood.
And they came over after the fire, the fire chief
did and asked, said, well, hadn't they cleaned the
chimney every year? I said, we've been in it five
years and they had never cleaned the chimney. So
the soot caught fire up there. And there was a
former black man that had worked there for the
Okay, I know their name sometime, and other times I
can't think of it. Who was president just before
Earl? David? Morgan. Morgan. I started to say
Morgan. I knew that wasn't right. Morgan. He had
worked for them, and he said that it caught fire up
there once before, and he said he threw a handful of
salt onto the burning wood, and it snuffed it out. I
didn't know you could do such a thing. I didn't
either. Haven't ever tried that. So you all
discovered this at lunchtime? Well, what
happened? I didn't discover it. There were two men
in a pickup that were driving by, and they said
there was just a little flame around where the
chimney came out the roof. And they said, the house
is on fire. Well, Linda and Jane had not even
dressed. It was the days of wearing moo-moos, so
they were in their moo-moos. And Linda ran and
looked up in the attic, and she said if she'd have
had a fire extinguisher, she could have put it out.
It was such a small... blame then but anyway the
first fire truck that came so the fire chief told us
he was so excited about what was burning that he
didn't turn the right thing in his fire truck and
the water was not reaching where the flame was so
this wind hit it and it's an old frame you know just
all right now when did the when did it begin what
time of day oh right at noon right at right at noon
all right and by what time did you all decide you had
uh well see Earl I don't think Earl ever came inside
I made three racing trips Earl was getting you know
as I said I kept his uniform for 33 years that we were
married before he died, he just left it up to me to
keep his uniforms ready to go. And he was to go to
Washington for some military meeting. And I had
been pressing that uniform, polishing the brass,
which is over on the dresser. And anyway, so I
grabbed the uniform and raced downstairs with it.
And he had bought me a first stole, so I'd look
pretty nice for his inauguration. I thought, I
better get that on, won't get another one.
those two things that i went downstairs and got his
military overcoat and his hat whatever you call it
put those in the car happened to be at the back in the
driveway at the back and so i just threw him in the
car then i went back and got oh on the rod about this
much i got i could see the two newest suits that i had
i thought i've got to have something to wear so Oh,
and we'd change the beds that morning, and in the
laundry bag I'd put, because shoes were always a
problem for me, and I'd put three pairs of shoes and
then dropped it over the stairwell. But I made
three trips. I went and got things that Ann had
brought home from school. She was home between
semesters. Then a few things out of Bob's room. And
when I started down the stairway, the third trip
that I was making, I got choked on the smoke, and the
fireman... told me in no uncertain terms to get
outside and not come back in. So I did. And I
remember a guy that was from here, but he worked for
the Daily Texan. And he wrote a column, of course,
and got the paper. And he said that I had noticed
smoke coming through the walls most of the
morning, but I hadn't thought anything about it. I
thought, that makes me sound like an idiot. And I
brought it up to him one time much later on. He said
he didn't remember it. Anyway,
Doris Hannigan somehow appeared on the scene and
took me over to her house.
What did you all lose that was sentimentally
priceless? Up in the attic I had so many boxes of
clippings from the war, like from the
Philadelphia War.